Upgrading from 0.12.0 to 0.13.0
===============================

Add additional bundles
----------------------

.. note::

    This section is specific to Netgen Layouts Enterprise.

Some features of Netgen Layouts Enterprise require an additional bundle to be
activated. The bundle is included in 0.13 version of Netgen Layouts Enterprise
and all you need to do is to activate it by adding ``Netgen\Bundle\LayoutsEnterpriseAdminBundle\NetgenLayoutsEnterpriseAdminBundle``
in your kernel class, after all other Netgen Layouts bundles. Make sure to
activate it before running Composer so its assets can be installed automatically.
Otherwise, you will need to install the assets by hand by running the
``php bin/console assets:install --symlink --relative`` command.

Upgrade ``composer.json``
-------------------------

In your ``composer.json`` file, upgrade the version of ``netgen/layouts-core``
package and all other related packages (like ``netgen/layouts-standard``,
``netgen/layouts-ezplatform`` and others) to ``~0.13.0`` and run the
``composer update`` command.

Add additional packages
-----------------------

.. note::

    This section is specific to Netgen Layouts Enterprise integrated into eZ Platform.

Version 0.13 of Netgen Layouts Enterprise integrated into eZ Platform requires
an additional package for proper eZ Platform support. To activate the package,
execute the following to add the package to your ``composer.json``:

.. code-block:: shell

    $ composer require netgen/layouts-enterprise-ezplatform:~0.13.0

After installing the package, activate
``Netgen\Bundle\LayoutsEnterpriseEzPlatformBundle\NetgenLayoutsEnterpriseEzPlatformBundle``
bundle in your kernel class. Make sure it is activated after all other
Netgen Layouts Enterprise bundles.

Finally, if you have the legacy ``nglayouts`` extension activated for
eZ Publish Legacy admin support, deactivate it and activate
``nglayouts_enterprise`` extension instead.

Database migration
------------------

Run the following command from the root of your installation to execute
migration to version 0.13 of Netgen Layouts:

.. code-block:: shell

    $ php bin/console doctrine:migrations:migrate --configuration=vendor/netgen/layouts-core/migrations/doctrine.yml

Upgrading Netgen Content Browser
--------------------------------

Netgen Content Browser version 0.13 was also automatically installed. Be sure to
read `its upgrade instructions </projects/cb/en/latest/upgrades/upgrade_0120_0130.html>`_
too, to make sure you custom code keeps working.

Breaking changes
----------------

There were no breaking changes in 0.13 version of Netgen Layouts.
