Parameter types
===============

When adding a parameter to the block or a query in your block definition or a
query type, you can specify the parameter name, the type of the parameter and
parameter options. This is achieved through an object called parameter builder
which is provided to you in your block definition or a query type.

Parameter builder has methods for working with the parameters: adding, removing
and fetching the parameters as well as setting parameter options.

When adding parameters to block definitions or queries, referencing the
parameter type is done by specifying FQCN of the parameter type.

Common parameter options
------------------------

In addition to the list of options specific to each parameter type, all types
have five common options: ``required``, ``default_value``, ``group``, ``label``
and ``constraints``.

``required``
~~~~~~~~~~~~

**type**: ``bool``, **required**: No, **default value**: ``false``

Specifies if the parameter value is required or not.

``default_value``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**type**: ``mixed``, **required**: No, **default value**: ``null``

Specifies the default value of the parameter.

``group``
~~~~~~~~~

**type**: ``array`` of ``string`` values, **required**: No, **default value**: ``[]``

Specifies the parameter group. Groups are a generic concept when working with
parameters. Netgen Layouts does not enforce or otherwise define how you use
parameter groups. Internally, Netgen Layouts uses groups in block definitions to
specify to which form (content or design) the parameter belongs and in query
types to specify which parameters are advanced and hidden by default.

``constraints``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**type**: ``array`` of Symfony constraints or closures, **required**: No, **default value**: ``[]``

This parameter specifies the list of constraints that will be applied to a
parameter in addition to constraints specified by the parameter type itself.
These can be useful if some of your parameters have special needs from
validation.

You can provide either a list of Symfony constraints, or closures that return
a constraint. Closures can be useful when you need to validate the value of a
parameter against other fields in the block or query. This is achieved by
providing three parameters when your closure constraint is called, respectively:

* the value of the parameter
* an array of all parameters
* the parameter definition of the parameter, which is an instance of
  ``Netgen\Layouts\Parameters\ParameterDefinition``

An example closure constraint would be one that checks that one ``datetime``
parameter value is larger than the other ``datetime`` parameter value:

.. code-block:: php

    $builder->add(
        'visible_to',
        ParameterType\DateTimeType::class,
        [
            'constraints' => [
                static function ($visibleTo, array $parameters): ?Constraint {
                    $visibleFrom = $parameters['visible_from'];

                    if (
                        !$visibleFrom instanceof \DateTimeInterface ||
                        !$visibleTo instanceof \DateTimeInterface
                    ) {
                        return;
                    }

                    return new Constraints\GreaterThan(['value' => $visibleFrom]);
                },
            ],
        ]
    );

``label``
~~~~~~~~~

**type**: ``string``, ``false`` or ``null``, **required**: No, **default value**: ``null``

Specifies the human readable name of the parameter. In Netgen Layouts this label
is for example used in Symfony forms which edit blocks or queries.

.. tip::

    Use ``false`` to disable parameter label in Symfony forms. If ``null`` is
    specified, the label will be generated by using Symfony translation
    component from the parameter name.

List of built in parameter types
--------------------------------

The following lists all parameter types built into Netgen Layouts together with
the options available in each parameter type.

.. include:: /reference/parameter_types/index.rst.inc
